README.md, before:

# The Dam Busters
Portfolio Project 1

## Introduction

The Dam Buster site is for educational purposes and created by the Lancaster History Foundation as a go to place for people that have not earlier been aware of the amazing story of the 617th RAF squadron and their dam buster raid in 1943.

## UX
The historical event of the Dam Buster Raid:

Operation Chastise or more known as The Dams Raid 

### User Stories:

As a user I want to easily find relevant summary about the event
as a user I want the historical events come to life in an engaging way and chronological way
I want to be able to find out about the history of the aircraft that was used
I want to be able to find out about the background of some key players in the mission
As a user I would like to find a gallery with more images showing the history of the event in pictures
As a user I want to be able to find any information on where I could see historical items in a museum
As a user I would like to find a program with dates for air shows displaying these old aircrafts flying
As a user I would like to be able to find more detailed information presented in a logical and pedagogical way regarding all the aircrafts or persons involved in the mission
As a user I would like to see an index of other websites to be able to dive deeper into the background story of the Dams Raid.
As a user I would like to find out how to contact someone about the event
As the organisation we want to promote the historical sites such as museums and airshows for the user along with new information that comes about the historical event.
As the organisation we want to find people interested in these events and to share new sides to the story with engaged people

### Opportunities

| Opportunity | Importance | Viability / Feasability |
|-------------|------------|-------------------------|
| Create an online presence | 5 | 5 |
| Create a pedagogical and chronological summary presented in an engaging way | 5 | 5 |
| Create a gallery with historical images | 5 | 5 |
| Provide reference details of the aircrafts and personnel in the mission | 5 | 5 |
| Provide reference details on the key players of the mission | 5 | 5 |
| Create a table displaying upcoming relevant historical shows and events | 5 | 5 |
| Create an index for further research | 5 | 5 |
| Promote a signup to newsletter | 5 | 5 |
| Promote a single point of reference and contact for more information regarding the site or historical event | 5 | 5 |
| Create an interactive section for the user to engage more actively in the learning process | 5 | 1 | 


### Priority of information:

1.
2.
3.

### Scope:
Here a run through of the extensive information available is required to be able to boil it down to a executable amount of text to present on a bes
What will be included in the website is:

Navigation Bar including links and logo with common design across pages
Footer
Header with an Hero image and text overlay
A section with a summary leading the user into the story
Section with short summaries of each segments of the story in chronological order together with images
Statistics showing the general info in numbers
Cards with key players and a short bio

An aircrafts page with a table of  the aircrafts in the mission and their names
A gallery page with images
A contact us page
A more page, with links to more info and schedule to flying veterans airshows or other events of interests
404 page


## Wireframe Mockups and Color Card

I started with the by Code Institute recommended program Balsamiq to produce low fidelity wireframes to organize the information priorities and site structure and get a feeling for the size of each page.

- [Home page wireframe](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/1_Index.html.png)
- [Aircrafts page wireframe](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/2_Aircrafts.png)
- [Gallery page wireframe](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/3_Gallery.png)
- [Contact us page wireframe](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/4_Contact%20Us.png)

When I had the general structure of each page established I moved on to creating a full color and image mockup in Figma to be able to test the color selection that I had decided on. I used https://colorhunt.co/ as an inspiration to find a colorscheme. As the colors selected are the same color nyanses that was used as camouflage paint on the Lancaster Bombers, I decided to utilise this scheme for my visual language to stay true to the theme. The red accent color selected is an homage to the famous movie about the historical event to come out in 1955 and was useful to create visible user responsiveness.


- [Main page color mockup](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/The%20Dam%20Busters-2.png)

![Color and Font-Family Card](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/Color%20Card%20The%20Dam%20Busters.png)

## Features

- Navigation Bar
  - For the design of the navigation bar is a common design with logo - depicting the emblem of the 617th Squadron involved - to the left and navigation    links to the right, and used througout all the pages as    well as the main page.
  - The links include Home, Aircrafts, Gallery and Contact as well as the logo to the left. The links head to their respective page for easy navigation     and the logo is used as a typical and well known take-me-home-button that users are familiar with.
  - The navigation bar is responsive and highlights the current webpage visited by a horisontal accent color line, as well as a slight increase in font     size as an indicator to the used  as to which page they are currently on.
  - It is also responsive to screen sizes throughout the use of media queries and att 1200px and 810px intervals the size of the link-text is changed to    smaller size.

![Navigation Bar](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Navbar.png)

- Hero Image
  - All pages include the hero image along with standard h1 header and the paragraph below changing to indicate what site the user is currently on to       further indicate what section of the site they are currently on.
  - The image was carefully selected to give the best immediate respons in the user upon landing on the website. 
  - The image depicting a Lancaster Bomber during its bombing run was separated from its background using Photoshop. With a bit of time and patience I       also managed to remove all traces of the bomber from the background to end up with two separate images where the bomber is isolated a in a png           format. I then took these two images and created perspective effect to hero image section.

![Hero Image](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Hero-image.png)

![Hero Image Introduction Text](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Hero-image-introduction.png)

- Footer
  - A footer split into two sections can be found on each page.
  - The **left side** of the footer includes a call to action for the user to sign up to the newsletter. This will enable us to encourage more users to     stay up to date on the latest information about upcoming air shows, new historical information and more.
  - The **right side** of he footer includes links to all the social media platforms used by the Lancaster History Foundation and is a subtle call to action for the user to visit the social media platforms of the organisation. 
  - It is an effective way to promote the oranisations other platforms and a good way to increase the number of followers in these channels.
  - The footer also includes the copyright information.

![Footer](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Footer.png)


## Story

### Section 1 - Introduction
Guy Gibson sat in the cockpit of his Lancaster bomber, his heart racing as he descended down towards the lake. He could feel the tension in the air as his crew prepared for the attack on the dam. The water rushed by below, and Gibson could hear the roar of the engines as they approached the target.


### Section 2: Background

During World War II, a British engineer named Barnes Wallis came up with a daring plan to destroy the three dams - Möhne, Eder and Sorpe -  that powered the German Industry and cities of the Ruhr Valley. The mission to destroy the dams was code-named "Operation Chastise," but it is better known as the Dam Buster mission. This mission was carried out by a group of British pilots flying specially modified bombers known as Lancaster bombers.

### Section 3: Ingenuity

The Ruhr Valley was a key target for Allied bombing, but it was heavily defended by anti-aircraft guns and fighters. To overcome this challenge, Barnes Wallis designed a spinning bomb that could skip across the surface of the water and explode underwater, causing massive damage to the dam. This bomb was named "Upkeep".
Barnes Wallis's bomb design was an incredible piece of engineering ingenuity. The bomb was designed to skip across the surface of the water, over torpedo nets and hit the dam at a precise angle, at which point it would sink to the bottom and detonate. Wallis tested the bomb in a special pool and discovered that the bomb had to be spun at a precise speed to skip across the water. He also modified the Lancaster bombers to carry the bomb and to fly at a low altitude.

### Section 4: Dangers
The planning for the mission was extensive. The pilots had to practice low-level flying and bombing techniques for months before the mission. They also had to rehearse the mission plan repeatedly to ensure that they could carry it out quickly and efficiently. The mission was scheduled for the night of May 16, 1943, and the bombers were divided into three groups, each with a specific target.

### Section 5: Planning

  The pilots faced several challenges as they approached the dams. They had to fly low enough to avoid radar detection and anti-aircraft fire but not so low that they crashed into the water. They also had to release the bomb at exactly the right moment and from exactly the right distance so that it would skip across the water and hit the dam. The pilots were under intense pressure to succeed, and failure could mean the loss of their own lives and those of many others.
  
### Section 6: The Night of the Mission

Nineteen Lancaster bombers took off from an airfield in eastern England and flew across the North Sea towards Germany. The pilots had to navigate by the stars because they could not use radio or other navigational aids that might alert the Germans. 
The pilots faced intense anti-aircraft fire and had to fly at extremely low altitudes to avoid being shot down. Despite the dangers, the first two groups of bombers successfully destroyed the Möhne and Eder dams, and the third group damaged the Sorpe dam.

### Chapter 7: Aftermath

The Dam Buster mission was a major success. The bombing disrupted German industry and made it more difficult for them to produce weapons and supplies. The mission also had a significant impact on British morale, as it showed that the seemingly invincible German war machine could be beaten. However, the mission also came at a heavy cost. Eight of the nineteen Lancaster bombers were shot down, and 53 of the 133 crew members were killed.
The surviving pilots were hailed as heroes for their bravery and ingenuity. Wing Commander Guy Gibson, who led the mission, was awarded the Victoria Cross, the highest award for bravery in the British military. The pilots who took part in the mission became legends




The Dam Busters -  Alfa Slab One
Taking out the big dams of Nazi Germany - Gentium Book Basic











#2C3639		 #3F4E4F		   #A27B5C                             #DCD7C9



Colors are selected with the camouflage that was normally painted on the Lancaster Bomber. 
The red accent color is an homage to the famous movie made in the 1950s about the historical event.

Errors:

position: relative/fixed
I had a problem with the hero image. Since I have a background image with a relative section and then a png image with fixed position, I had a problem with the site being wider than the browser so sidescrolling was possible. I had to go through the css with comments marks and isolate every rule to see where the side scrolling appeared.

Credits:

Special thanks to my mentor Garreth McGirr for the tips and guidance.

I used https://www.fontpair.com to find a matching font pair for the project.

I used https://www.upscale.media to upscale low res images.

I learned flexbox from www.flexboxfroggy.com .

And used some code from https://www.w3schools.com/css/css3_flexbox_responsive.asp for the gallery page.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Chastise was used for gathering some of the information used on the website.

https://www.iwm.org.uk/history/the-incredible-story-of-the-dambusters-raid was used to gather image resources.

(I used https://colorhunt.co/ to find a suitable color scheme to start working with and found that site via a fellow Code Institute students project https://designland.herokuapp.com/)

Commit message:

docs: Add further information the readme
Add further information to the home page features section of the readme

README.md, after:

# The Dam Busters
Portfolio Project 1

## Introduction

The Dam Buster site is for educational purposes and created by the Lancaster History Foundation as a go to place for people that have not earlier been aware of the amazing story of the 617th RAF squadron and their dam buster raid in 1943.

## UX
The historical event of the Dam Buster Raid:

Operation Chastise or more known as The Dams Raid 

### User Stories:

As a user I want to easily find relevant summary about the event
as a user I want the historical events come to life in an engaging way and chronological way
I want to be able to find out about the history of the aircraft that was used
I want to be able to find out about the background of some key players in the mission
As a user I would like to find a gallery with more images showing the history of the event in pictures
As a user I want to be able to find any information on where I could see historical items in a museum
As a user I would like to find a program with dates for air shows displaying these old aircrafts flying
As a user I would like to be able to find more detailed information presented in a logical and pedagogical way regarding all the aircrafts or persons involved in the mission
As a user I would like to see an index of other websites to be able to dive deeper into the background story of the Dams Raid.
As a user I would like to find out how to contact someone about the event
As the organisation we want to promote the historical sites such as museums and airshows for the user along with new information that comes about the historical event.
As the organisation we want to find people interested in these events and to share new sides to the story with engaged people

### Opportunities

| Opportunity | Importance | Viability / Feasability |
|-------------|------------|-------------------------|
| Create an online presence | 5 | 5 |
| Create a pedagogical and chronological summary presented in an engaging way | 5 | 5 |
| Create a gallery with historical images | 5 | 5 |
| Provide reference details of the aircrafts and personnel in the mission | 5 | 5 |
| Provide reference details on the key players of the mission | 5 | 5 |
| Create a table displaying upcoming relevant historical shows and events | 5 | 5 |
| Create an index for further research | 5 | 5 |
| Promote a signup to newsletter | 5 | 5 |
| Promote a single point of reference and contact for more information regarding the site or historical event | 5 | 5 |
| Create an interactive section for the user to engage more actively in the learning process | 5 | 1 | 


### Priority of information:

1.
2.
3.

### Scope:
Here a run through of the extensive information available is required to be able to boil it down to a executable amount of text to present on a bes
What will be included in the website is:

Navigation Bar including links and logo with common design across pages
Footer
Header with an Hero image and text overlay
A section with a summary leading the user into the story
Section with short summaries of each segments of the story in chronological order together with images
Statistics showing the general info in numbers
Cards with key players and a short bio

An aircrafts page with a table of  the aircrafts in the mission and their names
A gallery page with images
A contact us page
A more page, with links to more info and schedule to flying veterans airshows or other events of interests
404 page

The text in each section is carefully shortned into sizes in large enough bite sizes for the user to be able to stay interesed and keep on reading with the continuation of incremental releases mixed with more traditional text sections to give a balance to the experience.


## Wireframe Mockups and Color Card

I started with the by Code Institute recommended program Balsamiq to produce low fidelity wireframes to organize the information priorities and site structure and get a feeling for the size of each page.

- [Home page wireframe](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/1_Index.html.png)
- [Aircrafts page wireframe](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/2_Aircrafts.png)
- [Gallery page wireframe](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/3_Gallery.png)
- [Contact us page wireframe](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/4_Contact%20Us.png)

When I had the general structure of each page established I moved on to creating a full color and image mockup in Figma to be able to test the color selection that I had decided on. I used https://colorhunt.co/ as an inspiration to find a colorscheme. As the colors selected are the same color nyanses that was used as camouflage paint on the Lancaster Bombers, I decided to utilise this scheme for my visual language to stay true to the theme. The red accent color selected is an homage to the famous movie about the historical event to come out in 1955 and was useful to create visible user responsiveness.


- [Main page color mockup](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/The%20Dam%20Busters-2.png)

![Color and Font-Family Card](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/wireframes/Color%20Card%20The%20Dam%20Busters.png)

## Features

### Normal Features 

- Navigation Bar
  - For the design of the navigation bar is a common design with logo - depicting the emblem of the 617th Squadron involved - to the left and navigation    links to the right, and used througout all the pages as    well as the main page.
  - The links include Home, Aircrafts, Gallery and Contact as well as the logo to the left. The links head to their respective page for easy navigation     and the logo is used as a typical and well known take-me-home-button that users are familiar with.
  - The navigation bar is responsive and highlights the current webpage visited by a horisontal accent color line, as well as a slight increase in font     size as an indicator to the used  as to which page they are currently on.
  - It is also responsive to screen sizes throughout the use of media queries and att 1200px and 810px intervals the size of the link-text is changed to    smaller size.

![Navigation Bar](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Navbar.png)

- Hero Image
  - All pages include the hero image along with standard h1 header and the paragraph below changing to indicate what site the user is currently on to       further indicate what section of the site they are currently on.
  - The image was carefully selected to give the best immediate respons in the user upon landing on the website. 
  - The image depicting a Lancaster Bomber during its bombing run was separated from its background using Photoshop. With a bit of time and patience I       also managed to remove all traces of the bomber from the background to end up with two separate images where the bomber is isolated a in a png           format. I then took these two images and created perspective effect to hero image section.

![Hero Image](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Hero-image.png)

![Hero Image Introduction Text](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Hero-image-introduction.png)

- Footer
  - A footer split into two sections can be found on each page.
  - The **left side** of the footer includes a call to action for the user to sign up to the newsletter. This will enable us to encourage more users to     stay up to date on the latest information about upcoming air shows, new historical information and more.
  - The **right side** of he footer includes links to all the social media platforms used by the Lancaster History Foundation and is a subtle call to action for the user to visit the social media platforms of the organisation. 
  - It is an effective way to promote the oranisations other platforms and a good way to increase the number of followers in these channels.
  - The footer also includes the copyright information.

![Footer](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Footer.png)

### Home Page

- Introduction 
  - The first section offers an exciting introduction for the user to the story of the dam buster raid and comes a scroll down after the the h1 title on    the same hero image. 
  - The text is increased somewhat in fontsize and line-height to increase readability as the text is on top of the hero-image as well as a way to ease the user into diving further into the story and website.
  - The larger engaging introduction increases the likelyhood of an intitial positive user experience and a hint showing them that there will be incremental releases further down the page.
  
![Hero Image Introduction Text](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Hero-image-introduction.png)


- Section 2: Background
  - Here we establish ourselves in the actual events and the background that lead up to the bombing raid. 

![Section 2: Background](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Background%20section.png)

- Section 3: Ingenuity
  - The user is introduced to the inventor of the bomb that made the entire mission possible, Barnes Willis. The text color changes to black to contrast the wite in the fixed background image with a portrait of Wallis besides the text.

![Section 3: Ingenuity](https://github.com/christiangoran/the-dam-busters/blob/main/assets/readme-media/Ingenuity%20Section.png)

## Story

### Section 1 - Introduction
Guy Gibson sat in the cockpit of his Lancaster bomber, his heart racing as he descended down towards the lake. He could feel the tension in the air as his crew prepared for the attack on the dam. The water rushed by below, and Gibson could hear the roar of the engines as they approached the target.


### Section 2: Background

During World War II, a British engineer named Barnes Wallis came up with a daring plan to destroy the three dams - Möhne, Eder and Sorpe -  that powered the German Industry and cities of the Ruhr Valley. The mission to destroy the dams was code-named "Operation Chastise," but it is better known as the Dam Buster mission. This mission was carried out by a group of British pilots flying specially modified bombers known as Lancaster bombers.

### Section 3: Ingenuity

The Ruhr Valley was a key target for Allied bombing, but it was heavily defended by anti-aircraft guns and fighters. To overcome this challenge, Barnes Wallis designed a spinning bomb that could skip across the surface of the water and explode underwater, causing massive damage to the dam. This bomb was named "Upkeep".
Barnes Wallis's bomb design was an incredible piece of engineering ingenuity. The bomb was designed to skip across the surface of the water, over torpedo nets and hit the dam at a precise angle, at which point it would sink to the bottom and detonate. Wallis tested the bomb in a special pool and discovered that the bomb had to be spun at a precise speed to skip across the water. He also modified the Lancaster bombers to carry the bomb and to fly at a low altitude.

### Section 4: Dangers
The planning for the mission was extensive. The pilots had to practice low-level flying and bombing techniques for months before the mission. They also had to rehearse the mission plan repeatedly to ensure that they could carry it out quickly and efficiently. The mission was scheduled for the night of May 16, 1943, and the bombers were divided into three groups, each with a specific target.

### Section 5: Planning

  The pilots faced several challenges as they approached the dams. They had to fly low enough to avoid radar detection and anti-aircraft fire but not so low that they crashed into the water. They also had to release the bomb at exactly the right moment and from exactly the right distance so that it would skip across the water and hit the dam. The pilots were under intense pressure to succeed, and failure could mean the loss of their own lives and those of many others.
  
### Section 6: The Night of the Mission

Nineteen Lancaster bombers took off from an airfield in eastern England and flew across the North Sea towards Germany. The pilots had to navigate by the stars because they could not use radio or other navigational aids that might alert the Germans. 
The pilots faced intense anti-aircraft fire and had to fly at extremely low altitudes to avoid being shot down. Despite the dangers, the first two groups of bombers successfully destroyed the Möhne and Eder dams, and the third group damaged the Sorpe dam.

### Chapter 7: Aftermath

The Dam Buster mission was a major success. The bombing disrupted German industry and made it more difficult for them to produce weapons and supplies. The mission also had a significant impact on British morale, as it showed that the seemingly invincible German war machine could be beaten. However, the mission also came at a heavy cost. Eight of the nineteen Lancaster bombers were shot down, and 53 of the 133 crew members were killed.
The surviving pilots were hailed as heroes for their bravery and ingenuity. Wing Commander Guy Gibson, who led the mission, was awarded the Victoria Cross, the highest award for bravery in the British military. The pilots who took part in the mission became legends




The Dam Busters -  Alfa Slab One
Taking out the big dams of Nazi Germany - Gentium Book Basic











#2C3639		 #3F4E4F		   #A27B5C                             #DCD7C9



Colors are selected with the camouflage that was normally painted on the Lancaster Bomber. 
The red accent color is an homage to the famous movie made in the 1950s about the historical event.

Errors:

position: relative/fixed
I had a problem with the hero image. Since I have a background image with a relative section and then a png image with fixed position, I had a problem with the site being wider than the browser so sidescrolling was possible. I had to go through the css with comments marks and isolate every rule to see where the side scrolling appeared.

Credits:

Special thanks to my mentor Garreth McGirr for the tips and guidance.

I used https://www.fontpair.com to find a matching font pair for the project.

I used https://www.upscale.media to upscale low res images.

I learned flexbox from www.flexboxfroggy.com .

And used some code from https://www.w3schools.com/css/css3_flexbox_responsive.asp for the gallery page.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Chastise was used for gathering some of the information used on the website.

https://www.iwm.org.uk/history/the-incredible-story-of-the-dambusters-raid was used to gather image resources.

(I used https://colorhunt.co/ to find a suitable color scheme to start working with and found that site via a fellow Code Institute students project https://designland.herokuapp.com/)
